School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham
COMP3004/4105 Designing Intelligent Agents
Spring 2025/26
Colin Johnson and Jeremie Clos

Information
Component weight:
Expected workload:
Release date:
Submission date:
Marks / Feedback release date:
Submission method:
Late submission policy:
Feedback session date:

100%
90-100 hours
3rd of March 2026
14th of May 2026
5th of June 2026
Moodle submission
UoN default 5% per working day
June 2026

Overview
The coursework for this module is based around (1) designing intelligent autonomous agents
and an environment with which they interact, (2) setting those agents a task, (3) asking one
or more questions about that task, and (4) evaluating it using experimental methods. You will
then present the results from this in a report, video or podcast, which will also explain the
context for the work; and, submit the code and other supplementary materials. Students
doing COMP4105 will in addition do a short presentation explaining how their coursework
relates to contemporary research and technology.

Requirements & Specifications
An autonomous intelligent agent is a program that operates in a particular environment,
perceives aspects of that environment, and then uses its intelligence to choose actions that
change that environment, to carry out some task. Typically, these actions are a mixture of
responses (either immediate or deliberated) to its perception and memory, and proactive
actions such as exploration.
Your task for this coursework is to design an agent-based system containing the following
four aspects:
An Environment. This is the (virtual) place where the agents will operate. It could be one of:
•

•
•
•
•

A simulation of a physical environment in which mobile robotic agents move. This
could be the simulation used in the classes earlier in the semester (perhaps
extended), a robot environment such as The Player Project
(http://playerstage.sourceforge.net), or a project in Unity or a similar game
environment if you are familiar with one from elsewhere.
A language environment, for example where humans are interacting using written or
spoken language with one or more intelligent agents,
The Bristol Stock Exchange system
(https://github.com/davecliff/BristolStockExchange) or a similar simulation of some
aspect of the economy or society
A game environment such as Ms. PacMan (https://gym.openai.com/envs/MsPacmanv0/), the Open Racing Car Simulator (http://torcs.sourceforge.net), RoboCup
(https://www.robocup.org/leagues/23) or similar (see e.g. http://www.gvgai.net)
One of the more complex task environments from the OpenAI Gym
(https://gym.openai.com)

There is no need to develop the environment yourself—the focus of the project will be on the
agents in the environment (robots, trading agents, game-playing agents, autonomous
drivers, language agents, etc.) – but it is likely that you will set up the details of the
1

environment to address your specific question. You are allowed to use the code from the
classes, but please try to make it clear which parts of the code are taken from the class
examples, and which is your own work (we appreciate that this is sometimes complicated to
do at a line-by-line level, but you should indicate this in terms of which functions/classes etc
are taken without modification and which are modified and to what extent).
Autonomous Agents. You should introduce one or more autonomous intelligent agents into
the environment, which use some kind of AI to solve a task.
•

•

Examples of AI could be an AI planning system such as Goal Oriented Action
Planning (http://alumni.media.mit.edu/~jorkin/goap.html), a search algorithm such as
A* search, a genetic or swarm search, a reinforcement learning algorithm, fuzzy
logic, or a hard-coded reactive or state-machine AI.
The task will be one relevant to the environment: e.g. a robot vacuum cleaner
clearing up dirt, a poet trying to write verse about the day’s news, a trader trying to
optimise its returns, a game player trying to get a high score in a game, etc.

Within reason, you can use any language to do this. If you are planning to use anything
other than Python, Java, C/C++, MATLAB/Octave, R, JavaScript, and mainstream web
technologies such as HTML/CSS/JS, then please mention this in your topic approval.
A Question. You should ask a specific question (or a set of related questions) about your
system. For example:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

How do different approaches (e.g. a genetic algorithm, an A* search algorithm, a
hard-coded heuristic, different kinds of reinforcement learning algorithms) compare in
terms of task performance?
How does the performance of the system change as we vary the number of agents in
it?
If the system is trained on one version of the environment, does that learning transfer
over to a new version of the environment?
How do different kinds of communication/coordination between agents affect the
efficiency of those agents on the task?
How much improvement does storing some information (e.g. a map of the
environment) make compared to carrying out the task in a purely reactive way?
How do different kinds of sensing/perception systems affect the capacity of the agent
to carry out its task?
How sensitive is the agent to error/noise?

A Set of Experiments. You should answer your question by carrying out a set of
experiments. Remember the structure that we talked about in the lecture on 17th February:
1. Implement code that carries out a run of the agent’s behaviour and measures
performance
2. Then, run that code multiple times to get a measure of average performance
3. Then, repeat that process for the different conditions in your question, and use
descriptive statistics, charts/visualisation, and/or inferential statistics (e.g.
significance tests) to test your question
Then, you should discuss the question using these experimental results as your evidence.
If this evaluation involves asking people to interact with your code, then please read the
notes on research ethics that are in the Coursework section of the module Moodle page.

2

Constraints. Your project is expected to demonstrate 90-100 hours of effort. So, you should
not just run a basic reinforcement learning or convolutional neural networks library/tutorial on
a simple environment from AI Gym or similar, though you can use these as part of your
work.
You are not allowed to develop a basic chatbot i.e. a single system that interacts with a
human using intent matching, identity management, transaction processing, question
answering etc. If you want to do something on language agents, you should do something
that goes beyond this (e.g. a creative language system, a system that involves interactions
between multiple language agents, or a system that involves a language-based interface to
another system). If you have doubts about this, please mention it in the topic approval.

Getting Started
You are at liberty to use any readily available libraries, frameworks, APIs, services, datasets
etc. as you want—but your work must demonstrate substantial work in using, combining and
building on what you use. You are not permitted to simply re-submit coursework from
another module, but you could potentially build on code that you have written previously and
build on it in a new way. If your work extends or re-uses coursework from other modules, it
must make a substantial and distinctive contribution beyond what was in those courseworks,
and you must clearly identify what the new contribution is.
The key to getting a good grade on this module is to do a piece of work that is balanced
between all parts of the coursework—you should justify why the topic is important and
perhaps explore why it is a good model problem for AI/autonomy, provide clear context in
research in the area, explain and justify the design of the agents and environment, have
clear questions, make sure that the experiments that you do are focused on the questions,
present the results clearly using statistical and/or visual methods, and make sure that you
reflect on the questions using the evidence from the experiments, and finally put the work
into the wider context of AI, agents and autonomous systems.

Recommendations
Here are a few examples of things that you could do. You don’t have to do one of these—
indeed, we would prefer you to come up with your own idea—but, these would all be
acceptable project ideas if you want to do them:
•
•
•
•
•

To take the “robot vacuum cleaner” from the early classes, and experiment with
different numbers of robots, and different coordination strategies (e.g. robots try to
stay a fixed distance from each other, compared to sharing a map that they build up)
Explore how multiple language agents, each of which has a particular set of
knowledge or perspective can, discuss/argue with each other to explore a topic.
Take a number of different trading strategies and run them in the Bristol Stock
Exchange system with varying amounts of noise/uncertainty, to see how robust each
strategy is.
Develop a game-playing agent or a control agent for an NPC or opponent in a game,
and explore different strategies for playing (or learning to play) a game.
Take the “avoid the cats” problem from the class, and compare a number of
strategies for the problem: warning the cats vs. moving out of the way, and learning
when to act based on a simple statistical approach vs. a decision-tree approach.

3

•

•

Consider the problem of planning a robot’s movement around a mapped environment
(e.g. the map generated from WiFi triangulation introduced in one of the classes).
Contrast A* search and genetic algorithms on this problem, and compare them both
against random wandering.
Explore a swarm simulation such as the Boids flocking algorithm explored in one of
the classes, and map out how the overall behaviour of the birds relates to the
parameters in the algorithm.

Submission Instructions
The module is assessed entirely by coursework—there is no exam.

Topic Approval: You should submit a short description of your project idea (a couple of
paragraphs, 100-200 words) on the Moodle page by 15:00 on 13th March 2026. We will then
give you feedback on whether the project is an acceptable one, and how it might be modified
or improved if it is not acceptable. If you submit before this date, we will endeavour to give
you early feedback.
Portfolio Submission: By 3pm on 14th May 2026 you should submit the following via
Moodle. This deadline may be extended if you have if you have an extension approved via
an Extenuating Circumstances request or a CERF request relating to a support plan. Late
submissions will incur a penalty of 5% per working day, in line with the standard University
late policy.
Your submission should contain:
1. A report, of up to 4000 words (not including references/headings), or a 20-minute video, or
a 20-minute audio podcast, where you describe:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The core ideas of your project; clearly state the question that you are trying to answer
A review of relevant ideas, technologies and research papers
How you designed the environment and agents in order to address that question
Technologies used, and challenges that you met in doing the implementation
How you set up and ran your experiments
The results from your experiments
A discussion of the question in light of the experimental results
A conclusion, where you summarise the work, reflect on its successes and
limitations, and briefly mention some ideas for how you would take the work forward
if you had more time
The target audience of this is students in your year on your degree—so, there is no need to
explain basic computer science ideas, but you should not assume a deep knowledge of your
particular topic.
2. A copy of your code, either as an upload or a link to a repository
3. Anything else that you think would be helpful for the markers, e.g. sample outputs from
your system, a link to a brief video demonstrating it working, reports from user
studies/interviews etc.
For students on COMP3004, the mark for this portfolio of work will count as 100% of the
module mark.
Presentation: In addition to the portfolio of work described for COMP3004, students on
COMP4105 should also do a 10-minute presentation about your work (dates/times will be
arranged; this is likely to be between 15th-16th May 2026 or the following week). This should
give an overview of your project and explain how it is informed by research ideas from AI
and intelligent agents.
4

For students on COMP4105, the portfolio of work (including the report/video/podcast) will
count for 90% of the marks on the module and the presentation for 10%.

Assessment Criteria
Learning Outcomes
This assessment tests the following learning outcomes:
•
•
•
•
•

To describe the problems and techniques in the design of intelligent agents, explain
common agent architectures.
To evaluate agent requirements and specifications. To analyse agent behaviour in a
variety of environments.
To demonstrate advanced Al programming skills.
To analyse and design complex multi-component systems.
To present work in a professional manner using appropriate technical concepts and
vocabulary (including both written and, for COMP4105 only, spoken presentation).

Marking Guide
Marking will take into account:
•
•
•

The intrinsic complexity of the overall project
Background research and how you have used it to contextualise your work
The choice of task environment and how you have used it/adapted it for your specific
project
• The effective use of artificial intelligence and agent-based systems ideas from the
course and your wider studies in designing your autonomous agents
• How clear your question(s) are, how well the experiments have been designed to
answer them, and your level of rigour in planning and analysing the experiments
• How well the report answers the question by using the evidence from the
experiments
• The overall clarity and structure of the report, appropriate use of scientific and
technical English, and the quality of charts, diagrams, pseudocode where relevant
• The quality of reflection on the successes and limitations of the work
• (For students doing a presentation) the structure of the presentation, the clarity of
explanations, and good use of slides or other visual aids
There is a detailed marking scheme at the end of the document.

Getting help
If you have any questions please ask us by email (Colin.Johnson@nottingham.ac.uk,
Jeremie.Clos@nottingham.ac.uk) or come along to the class sessions. The Tuesday
classes after the Spring break will be dedicated solely to coursework support.

Academic Integrity
This assessment should consist of your own individual work. You should make any direct
quotations clear both by using quotation marks and by providing a clear reference to the
paper immediately after the quotation. If you are building on someone else’s code (e.g. our
code from the classes, open-source projects, etc.), please make it clear which aspects of the
code are your work through the use of comments. The University has detailed advice about
academic integrity, and submissions that demonstrate a lack of that integrity will be treated
under appropriate disciplinary procedures.
5

AI Statement
Use of AI tools in preparing the portfolio of work is acceptable, but you should clearly state in
your report or in a document in your portfolio what you have used. Remember that you need
to demonstrate your learning on the module, and so your submission should represent
around 90-100 hours of your human effort over and above anything that is done by an AI
system. When preparing your report/podcast/video/presentation you should use AI system
only for minor grammatical corrections.
You must be confident of your understanding of everything in your submission and we
reserve the right to check up on this through an interview if we consider that the submission
does not show sufficient evidence of understanding.

Marking Scheme—Main Project
Each of the following descriptors gives a broad idea of the achievement expected for a mark
in that range. Clearly, individual projects may fall short in some areas and show excellence
in others. The marking will be adjusted to reflect the intrinsic difficulty of the project.
Band

Guidelines

90-100

Marks in this range are reserved for a superb all-round performance. Work done in
all aspects of the work go beyond even high expectations. The student has shown
a thorough understanding of the problem. All tasks, including very challenging
aspects and extensive stretch goals, have been successfully completed. The
project shows depth and engagement with research ideas, and everything has
been completed to a high standard. The report could form the basis of a
publishable conference/workshop paper.

80-89

Excellent contributions to all areas of the project. Exceeded expectations in some
areas by carrying out implementations and experiments of a high level of
complexity or sophistication. Demonstrates knowledge and understanding of the
ideas that goes beyond the material covered in the module. Clear appreciation of
the project as a whole, its adequacies, limitations and possibilities for future
development. The project demonstrates insight and depth beyond that usually
expected in undergraduate/master’s work. Report presented very clearly and to a
good professional standard.

70-79

Very good contributions to all areas of the project. Successful completion of the project
tasks including some more challenging aspects and stretch goals. Demonstrated initiative
and creative problem-solving ability. Able to undertake the work in a competent and
independent manner. Able to reflect accurately on adequacy and limitations of the project’s
achievements. Report presented very clearly and to a good professional standard.
Good appreciation of background. A good attempt at applying this to the task, with
demonstrated ability to cope with difficulties. Good technical skills in several areas. Whilst
most of the core aims of the project have been achieved, it might come a little short in
some areas. Good reflective understanding of the project. Well organised and structured
report, with perhaps a few parts unclear.
Postgraduate pass level. Satisfactory background reading and a competent attempt at
their tasks. Reasonable technical competence demonstrated. The core parts of the agents,
environment and experiments have been completed satisfactorily, but little achieved
beyond that. Able to reflect satisfactorily on the project. Or, a lower-difficulty project carried
out well. Decently written and structured report, but with perhaps some aspects unclear,
unbalanced or underdeveloped.
Undergraduate pass level. Competent background reading and appreciation of the
project area. Basic technological competence. Some areas of the core tasks may be

60-69

50-59

40-49

6

30-39

20-29

incomplete, but a decent attempt has been made at them. Able to reflect in a limited way
on the project. Report gives an overview of the project and is readable, but perhaps lacks
detail, clarity or focus in some areas and/or is too informal or unbalanced.
Unsatisfactory. Some attempt has been made at the background reading but clearly only
partial understanding of project topic. Incomplete attempt at the core tasks. Weak technical
competence. Little ability to reflect adequately on the project. Report fails to cover some
aspects of the work.
Inadequate background reading, but shows some limited understanding of how ideas can
be linked to the task. Minimal attempt at the core tasks, showing poor understanding. A
substantial amount of work is still needed to achieve the core tasks. Minimal reflection on
the project. Report is disorganised, overly-short and contains areas that are very unclear
and/or demonstrates misunderstandings.

10-19

Minimal attempt at background reading, inappropriate use of material, almost no
attempt at core tasks. Very poor understanding of the problem. Minimal or no
reflection on the project. Minimal report, or report shows substantial
misunderstandings.

0-9

No or almost no significant attempt.

Marking Scheme—Presentation (COMP4105 only)
Each of the following descriptors gives a broad idea of the achievement expected for a mark
in that range. Clearly, individual projects may fall short in some areas and show excellence
in others. The marking will adjusted to reflect the intrinsic difficulty of the project.
Band

Guidelines

9-10

A professional-level presentation of exceptional clarity and very clear structure,
with very high-quality slides or other visual aids that flow seamlessly with the
spoken presentation. Shows a thorough and up-to-date understanding of research
and technologies in the area and how they relate to the work.

7-8

A clearly structured presentation, which explains all aspects of the project well, and
which has high-quality slides or other visual aids that are tied in strongly with the
spoken presentation. Well-grounded in an understanding of research and
technology in the area, including contemporary developments.

5-6

Postgraduate pass level. A competent presentation that has a decent structure,
gives a competent description of most aspects of the project, and where the slides
and other visual aids are largely clear and related to the spoken presentation.
Shows some awareness of how the project connects to research and technology in
the area.

3-4

A presentation that has some level of organisation but where the topics are not
presented in a clear order or where the presentation jumps from topic-to-topic,
some explanations not clear, visual aids provided but not very clear and/or not very
related to the spoken presentation. Shows lack of awareness of the wider
research/technology context.

1-2

A presentation that mentions some aspects of the project work but is largely
disorganised to the point where it cannot be followed and where most explanations
are unclear, and where visual aids are unclear and/or not related to the spoken
presentation. Minimal attempts to connect the work to research/technology.

0

No significant attempt at presentation

7

8

